Saving ggplot2 objects in a targets workflow technote (#439)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2022-12-06-save-ggplot2-targets/index.Rmd

If we compare their sizes:

```{r first-complex-sizes}
# The 'simple_plot' object hasn't changed size
lobstr::obj_size(tar_read(simple_plot))

# The 'complex_plot' object is actually larger
lobstr::obj_size(tar_read(complex_plot))
```

We observe that the `complex_plot` is larger in size than `simple_plot`! This seems very surprising as we haven't changed a line of the plotting code *per se*.
So what is happening here?
Well the issue comes from the way ggplot2 works: it doesn't save the graphical plots in themselves, it saves their **environment** and generates the plot only when called from this saved environment (see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/tidyverse/ggplot2/issues/4056) for example).
If you're not familiar with the concept of environment, don't worry!
It's a rather hard concept to grasp (and I'm not even sure I do understand it).
If you want to know more about it you can read the [dedicated chapter](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/environments.html) in [Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/).

> If we simplify the concept, the `ggplot()` function saves the plotting function in themselves **plus** all of the object lying around where it's called, because they may be useful for the plot (which one are actually useful ggplot2 can't tell because remember that the plot is only really rendered when called).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we simplify the concept, the `ggplot()` function saves the plotting functions themselves **plus** all of the objects lying around where it's called, because they may be useful for the plot (which ones are actually useful, ggplot2 doesn't know yet; remember that the plot is only really rendered when called).
```

Because targets saves the entire object it also saves its entire environment.
This problem was [also](https://github.com/ropensci/drake/issues/882) [known](https://github.com/ropensci/drake/issues/1258) with targets' predecessor [drake](https://docs.ropensci.org/drake).

In our workflow example above, the size difference between both objects isn't much, so it does not change the performance of the plot nor the total size taken by the saved targets workflow.
However, with a real life example with many complex objects and many intermediate computations in the plotting function, it can increase loading and plotting times dramatically.
So we need to think about solutions to circumvent the issue.

### Pros

* Works out of the box
* Have nothing to worry about
* Flexible with the size of the plots

### Cons

* Increased saved object size (and thus workflow size)
* If object is big, than slow to load

## Second (partial) solution: transform ggplot2 objects into `grobs` using target hooks

My workflows started to grow big and the plots were slow, so I asked around the targets community for a solution.

> While it was proposed at one point to create [a specific storage for ggplot2 objects](https://github.com/ropensci/drake/issues/882#issuecomment-580053751) in drake (the predecessor of targets), the reliance of the objects on environments made it impossible to solve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it was proposed at one point to create [a specific storage for ggplot2 objects](https://github.com/ropensci/drake/issues/882#issuecomment-580053751) in drake (the predecessor of targets), the reliance of the objects on environments made this problem impossible to solve.
```

> These objects need to be stored including all of their environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These objects simply had to be stored with their environment.
```

This means that if using `tar_hook_outer()` we would be able to automatically execute `ggplotGrob()` on all our plot targets like so:

```{r second-workflow-hooks}
tar_script({
  library("ggplot2")
  library("targets")
  
  list(
    tar_target(mtcars_df, mtcars),
    tar_target(
      simple_plot,
      ggplot(mtcars_df, aes(cyl, mpg)) +
        geom_point()
    ),
    tar_target(
      complex_plot,
      {
        
        # Add many useless manipulations here to mimic object creation
        mtcars_df2 = mtcars_df
        mtcars_df3 = rbind(mtcars_df, mtcars_df2)
        mtcars_df4 = rbind(mtcars_df3, mtcars_df3)
        
        # Note how the code of the plot hasn't changed
        ggplot(mtcars_df4, aes(cyl, mpg)) +
          geom_point()
        
      }
    )
  ) |>
    # The hook from tarchetypes
    tarchetypes::tar_hook_outer(
      ggplot2::ggplotGrob(.x),
      names = ends_with("plot")
    )
}, ask = FALSE)

# Run the workflow
tar_make()
```

We can check our plot objects:

```{r second-hook-grob, hugoopts=list(alt="Scatterplot of the mtcars dataset showing miles per gallon in function of number of cylinders.")}
tar_read(simple_plot)
tar_read(complex_plot)
```

> Both our plot objects were indeed transformed intro `Grob` objects! And with the adapted sizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both our plot objects were indeed transformed intro `Grob` objects! And with the smaller sizes.
```

With the hooks, we could easily transform all of the figures of a workflow into `Grobs`.

If this solution seems to solve all of our problems (though not as flexible), then why does this post continue?

Well, ggplot2 maintainers officially [discourage users from saving `ggplotGrobs`](https://github.com/tidyverse/ggplot2/issues/4649#issuecomment-952029317).
This is because they are not guaranteed to be reloadable.

> So presents quite a big concern for the reusability of objects in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So this presents quite a big concern for the reusability of objects in the future.
```
